#summary How to get a tar if you don't already have one.

The libarchive distribution builds *bsdtar*, which
is a full-featured command-line tar program.

The source code is distributed in two forms:
 * as a tar archive that has been compressed with gzip
 * as a zip archive

If you don't already have software that can extract
such archives, this may be problematic.
The remainder of this article explains one way around
this chicken-and-egg problem.

You can use very simple tools to unpack the libarchive
distribution in two steps:
 # uncompress the distribution file to obtain an uncompressed tar archive
 # untar the result to obtain the individual files

Once you have the unpacked files, you can then follow
the [BuildInstructions Build Instructions] to build
bsdtar.

= Gunzip =

For ease of downloading, the libarchive distribution is compressed.
To use the "untar" program below, you'll need to first
uncompress the libarchive distribution to obtain
an uncompressed tar archive.
This can be done by the _gunzip_ program, or by the
_gzip_ program with the `-d` (decompress) option.
Precompiled versions are available for most platforms;
you can check http://www.gzip.org/ for details.

Of course, you can also download the libarchive distribution
onto a system that has gzip, decompress it there,
then copy the uncompressed libarchive-XX.YY.ZZ.tar
onto the target system and untar it.

= Untar =

I've created an extremely minimal C
program called "untar" that knows just enough about the tar format
to extract a simple uncompressed tar archive.
In particular, it's sufficient to unpack the libarchive
distribution after you decompress it.

You can obtain the source for untar from:

http://libarchive.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/contrib/untar.c

The "untar" program is written using only Standard ISO C89
(with one exception explained below).  As such,
it should compile easily on any platform with a C compiler:
 * `cc -o untar untar.c`

That one exception is the `mkdir()` function for creating
a directory.  Unfortunately, ISO C does not provide a standard
function for creating a directory, so I've used the POSIX.1
standard `mkdir()` function.  Most platforms have `mkdir()`,
though you may need to adjust the headers somewhat.  If your
platform does not have `mkdir()`, you may need to edit the
`create_dir` function to create a directory in some other way.

The untar.c source code can also be used as an extremely
small implementation of a tar unpacker for use in very
space-constrained applications.
The source is in the public domain, please feel free
to use it as you see fit.