#summary Storing Extended Attributes in Tar Files
#labels tar,format

Also see: [TarNFS4ACLs] and [TarPosix1eACLs]

= Introduction =

Currently, I know of several different techniques for
storing POSIX.1e-style extended attributes within
tar files.  Apple has extended GNU tar with support
for a "resource file" stored as a separate entry.
Joerg Schilling's _star_ and my own _libarchive_
library (used by _bsdtar_) use pax extensions for
this purpose.  Solaris and AIX added new tar entry
types for this purpose.

= libarchive =

Libarchive stores each POSIX.1e extended attribute
as a separate pax attribute.  The pax attributes are
named LIBARCHIVE.xattr._name_, where _name_ is the
name of the POSIX.1e attribute.  The name includes
a namespace identifier (so an attribute "foo" in the
user namespace from a FreeBSD system would get stored
as LIBARCHIVE.xattr.user.foo).  Non-ASCII bytes
in the name get encoded as % followed by two uppercase
hex digits.  The value of the attribute is base-64
encoded.  In particular, note that the pax attribute
name and value are both entirely ASCII and hence are
correct UTF-8.  This was done to promote simple implementation
for pax readers and writers that use strict UTF-8 parsing
for all headers.

This approach works reasonably well for small attributes
but could be cumbersome for very large attributes.
It also does not support extended metadata (such as
per-EA ownership and permissions) supported on some systems.

= star =

Joerg Schilling's star uses a very similar approach.
It stores each attribute under SCHILY.xattr._name_
as above.  I haven't found any documentation for how
it handles non-ASCII bytes in the name or value.

The documentation included with star 1.5 (April, 2008)
includes comments about the non-portability of this approach
and suggests that this may be dropped in favor of a different
approach that supports Solaris as well.

As of January 2009, GNU tar seems to be considering this approach,
based on patches contributed by Red Hat.

= Apple's modified GNU tar =

Apple stores a separate resource file for each file written
to a tar archive.  This is based on a technique supported by
the "`CopyFile()`" library function.  The resource file is
stored as a tar file entry just before the regular file in
the archive and has the same name, except it is prepended with "`._`".
For example, the file "foo" would have a resource file "`._foo`".

I've not yet tracked down documentation for the format of this
resource file.  libarchive support may be possible.

= AIX tar =

AIX tar adds an 'E' entry following the regular file
entry for each extended attribute attached to the file.
The pathname of this entry is the name of the attribute.
The body contains the value of the attribute.  By
using the standard ustar pathname and body, AIX avoids
encoding concerns encoding for these fields.

The example I've seen seems to include some data beyond
the end of the EA body but I'm not sure what that is for.

Unfortunately, the AIX approach requires a minimum of 1024 bytes in the
archive for each EA.  It also puts the EAs after the main
entry.  This is fine if you have few EAs and they tend to
be large, but the applications of EAs that I've seen tend
to use very small values.  Adapting libarchive to support
AIX EAs would also be difficult; libarchive assumes that
all metadata (including EAs) precede the file data.

= Solaris tar =

I've seen references to an 'E' entry used by Solaris tar
but haven't yet found any detailed documentation or examples
of this entry.

