#summary Storing POSIX.1e-style ACLs in tar files
#labels tar,format

= Introduction =

I currently know of two approaches for storing POSIX.1e ACLs
in tar archives.  The first was originally developed by
Joerg Schilling for _star_ and subsequently adopted by libarchive
and by GNU tar.
The other was developed by Sun Microsystems for Solaris.

POSIX.1e ACLs are simpler and the draft specification
defines a portable interchange format, so the picture
here is a little clearer than for NFSv4 ACLs (or other
system-specific ACL implementations).  I've begun to
document NFSv4 ACL storage approaches in [TarNFS4ACLs].

Some of these techniques are similar to ones used for
storing POSIX.1e extended attributes.  See [TarExtendedAttributes]
for more information.

= star's approach =

Star stores POSIX.1e ACLs in pax attributes with the
names SCHILY.acl.access and SCHILY.acl.default.  The
values of these attributes are the textual ACL entries
for the access and default ACLs, respectively.  The
textual format follows POSIX.1e draft 17:
 * Individual entries are separated by commas.
 * A fourth colon-separated field is added to user and group entries with the numeric uid or gid.

In particular, note the necessity for storing both user/group
names and IDs for each user or group referenced.  The names
are critical when transferring data across systems, as IDs
may differ.  The IDs are critical for system backup/restore,
as the user/group databases may be unavailable at restore time.
(For example, you might be restoring a damaged user or group
database.)

= Solaris approach =

Prior to the standardization of the pax extended format,
Sun introduced a separate entry in tar files to hold the
ACL information.  This entry has type "A" and immediately
precedes the file to which it applies.  The body of this
entry consists of the following:
 * An ASCII number in octal followed by a single NULL byte.  The value is 01000000 plus the number of entries in the ACL.   The 01000000 value flags this as a POSIX.1e ACL; the count of entries is redundant and can generally be ignored.
 * A textual list of all ACL entries.  This list includes both default and access entries.  The default entries have the text "default" prepended (e.g., "defaultuser::rwx").  The entries are comma-separated.  Unlike the _star_ format, there is no additional field for the user/group ID.

= AIX approach =

AIX implemented a system similar to Solaris but with
a number of problems.
Most obviously, the ACL is stored after the entry and not before.
This constrains the possible implementations (libarchive, for
example, wants to see all metadata before reading the body).
The format used is also pretty non-portable.
The [TarNFS4ACLs] has some additional details about this format.