#summary Ideas that would be nice to implement someday.

If you would like to see any of these implemented, let us know by either posting a comment to this page or sending a note to the libarchive-discuss mailing list.
If you'd like to take a stab at implementing any of these, definitely let us know.
Also see [ReleaseNotes].
Please remember that libarchive is entirely developed by volunteers;
new features get implemented whenever someone steps up to do the work.
If you would like to try your hand at this, read [LibarchiveInternals] for
a guided tour of how libarchive works and ask on the
libarchive-discuss@googlegroups.com mailing list
if you have any questions.

<wiki:toc>

= Better Build Documentation =

The existing build documentation is a little hard to navigate.
It would be nice to break it out into separate pages by platform and provide more in the way of screenshots for the graphical tools and command examples for the command-line tools.

= Man Page Updates =

The man pages are a little out-of-date now; some of the newer changes need to be added.

= Better documentation conversions =

The existing conversion scripts don't do a bad job but could probably stand improvement.

= CMake-based install target =

The CMake-based build has basic install support, but could use improvement.

= CMake-based distribution building =

Currently, the distribution can only be built from the autoconf build system.
This is one of the few capabilities of the autoconf-based build that
is not implemented in the CMake-based build.

= Command-line parsing for compress_program =

The `archive_read_support_compress_program()` and `archive_write_set_compress_program()`
use external programs to compress or decompress data.
Right now, those take their string argument as the name of a program to run,
which provides no way to run programs with arguments.
This is why libarchive currently uses "gunzip", for example, as the fallback
for decompressing gzip streams instead of the more portable "gzip -d".
The parsing requirements are not difficult, so this should be a relatively
easy project for someone.

= Extended Attribute interoperability =

libarchive's handling of POSIX.1e-style extended attributes
in pax files should be interoperable across systems,
but there has not been a lot of testing of this.
There also needs to be some work to implement the system-dependent
portions for more operating systems.  (Currently, only Linux and
FreeBSD are fully supported; it should be easy to add Mac OS and
Solaris and possibly others.)

= Pax front-end =

It should be feasible to build a POSIX-compliant pax on top of libarchive.

= cpio as archive translation =

Essentially all of cpio's operation can be viewed as
archive translation (where "archive" means "description
of a series of filesystem objects"):
 * *cpio -o* reads a list of filenames and writes a cpio or tar archive
 * *cpio -p* reads a list of filenames and writes filesystem objects to disk
 * *cpio -i* reads an archive and writes filesystem objects to disk
libarchive's mtree reader demonstrates that a list of filenames
can be viewed as an archive, and `archive_write_disk()`
shows that a series of filesystem objects can be written to
a disk directory using the same interface that is used to
write them to a tar or cpio archive.
By implementing a "list of filenames" reader (similar to
the existing mtree reader), it should be possible to dramatically
simplify the cpio implementation.
Some tweaks to libarchive APIs might be necessary to make
this really clean, of course.
The end result should be a very simple cpio implementation that does everything the
standard requires with a few nice new features:
 * *cpio -o* can do arbitrary archive translation; if it can read a list of filenames, there's no reason it can't read a tar archive as well.
 * The common `find|cpio` idiom can use mtree format.  In particular, using mtree format between find and cpio allows the use of sed, grep, and awk to modify metadata (e.g., create a ustar archive where every file is owned by root).
 * A more modular libarchive interface will be more useful to other applications; this exercise will help in identifying some of the remaining rough edges.  (In particular, implementing *cpio -pl* efficiently will require some careful thought about how `sourcepath` should be handled.)

= Virtualizing archive_entry =

The username, group name, uid, and gid lookups are awkward.
These lookups are expensive to do so we'd like to avoid them when we can.
Pushing them into `archive_write_disk()` and `archive_read_disk()` works
well enough for tar and cpio because they operate in a particular fashion.
Other uses won't necessarily operate in the same way.

One way to solve this is to allow archive readers to push lookup
functions into the entry instead of direct values.
This would allow the username/group name/gid/uid lookup
to occur only when the value was requested.
If it was never requested, the lookup would never happen.
This will likely require some rethinking of libarchive APIs.
In particular, the existing "set_lookup" capabilities may need
to be reworked as a generic facility that can be configured
for any archive object, not just read_disk/write_disk objects.

Similar concerns apply to ACLs and extended attributes;
it would be most efficient to entirely skip such lookups
if the entry is ultimately being written to an archive format
that can't utilize such information.
(For example, using archive_read_disk() to get entries to
feed to a cpio writer currently pulls ACLs, extended attributes,
and user/group names that are never actually used.)

= Directory traversals in archive_read_disk =

Libarchive is a toolkit for handling long lists of filesystem objects.
The most obvious glaring hole is that you cannot ask libarchive
to enumerate the filesystem objects in a directory tree.
The `archive_read_disk` API is the obvious place to put this capability.
Getting an initial implementation working should be straightforward;
just copy the "tree.c" code from bsdtar and extend it to
return a series of archive_entry objects instead of just filenames.
The archive_entry virtualization above would help here but
is not a prerequisite.

Once the basic tree iteration is supported, there's a hard
problem around file filtering that will need to be solved before
the directory traversal from libarchive can actually be used
in bsdtar, for instance.
In particular, tar wants to filter the files; doing
this efficiently requires doing it as early as possible.
(In particular, filesystem traversals would like to avoid
descending into directory trees if nothing in that tree
will ever be visited.)

The simplest approach is to support a conditional descent
similar to what tree.c already supports.
This has the drawback of not being fully parallel with
the archive_read API, so I'm considering more complex
approaches that would register filter callbacks of
some sort.

= Explicit read pipelines =

Today, read filters are configured and then read pipelines
are assembled automatically.
There are a few cases where clients would like to create the
read pipeline manually.
This would allow them to handle partially-damaged input,
for example, by skipping the bidding process.
This probably requires rephrasing the existing read
filters so that there is an `archive_read_add_filter_XXXX()`
as well as an `archive_read_support_filter_XXXX()`.
In this form, the _support_ form would register the
bidder and the _add_ function.
The bid process would automatically invoke the _add_
function for the winning bidder.
Clients who wanted explicit configuration would just
call the _add_ version directly to add that filter
directly to the pipeline.

Of course, all of the capability here already exists;
the work here is to cleanly expose things, develop tests,
and make sure that the final API is clean and easy to
understand (and backwards compatible with existing clients
if that's possible).

= Encrypted backup support =

This should be a straightforward use of OpenSSL wrapped
up in matching read and write filters.
There should also be a standalone pair of encrypt/decrypt
command-line tools.
I have a rough design of how to implement this; ask for details.

= Multivolume Writing =

This requires two changes to the internal write filter API:
 * A "bytes remaining" call that the format writer can make against the write filters.  Most write filters will just pass it downstream and possibly reduce the return value to account for data they have currently buffered (and any end-of-file overhead).  Compression filters shouldn't try to adjust for compression ratio; underestimates are okay here but overestimates can be fatal.
 * A "volume change" call that the format writer can make to prompt each write filter to flush, invoke it's downstream, then reinitialize.  (Maybe just call close() and then open() callbacks?)

The interesting part will be working through the format writers to actually support this.
For tar and cpio, it might be as simple as invoking
a volume change before any entry that is larger than
the remaining bytes (plus some overhead).
(GNU tar-like entry splitting is not necessary in the first version.)
It is likely possible to implement multi-volume support for other
formats as well.
Here is an interesting use case:  Two libarchive instances, the
first writing a compressed tar stream, the second creating ISO images,
with volumes split so that each ISO image has a single compressed
tar file that fills the ISO.
The volume change from the tar writer closes the ISO writer, invokes
an ISO burner program to burn a disk, then reopens the ISO writer.
(Bonus points, of course, if the burner program runs while the next ISO is being
created.)

= Multivolume Reading =

Proper multivolume reading requires that each layer appropriately
detect end-of-input and invoke close()/open() on the next layer up.
The first step is to add multivolume support to archive_read_open_filename();
with no other changes, you should be able to read archives
that have been broken into pieces with the `split` program.
The next step is to change the way the tar reader handles
end-of-archive:  It should invoke close(), then open() and
return end-of-archive only if the open() returns end-of-archive.
Similar changes can be made to the gzip decompressor, for instance.
If properly done, libarchive will be able to transparently handle
all of the following scenarios:
 * A tar.gz archive that has been processed by `split`.  In this case, the I/O functions will reassemble the file without any intervention by the decompression or format handler.
 * A tar archive that has been `split` and then each piece separately gzip compressed.  In this case, the gzip decompressor will invoke close()/open() on the I/O functions to advance to the next file but the tar reader will see nothing.
 * A GNU-style multivolume tar archive with each volume separately compressed.  In this case, the tar format handler will see the end-of-archive markers and invoke close() that will ripple through the gzip decompressor and the I/O handler.  Of course, some additional work will be required for the tar reader to handle entries that have been split across volumes.

= RMT support =

RMT hasn't been a priority simply because noone has ever asked for it.
However, it is one of the few features that is both
reasonably standard across other tar implementations and
already has a hook for adding it to libarchive (just
add a new `archive_read_open_rmt()` module).
NetBSD has a BSD-licensed rmt library that we might be able to
crib from, though the rmt protocol is simple
enough that you could also just implement it from scratch.
This will require careful compatibility testing with a
couple of different rmt servers.

This would be a good project for someone who is trying
to learn network programming.

= Exploiting seekable input =

This requires a little care, but ISO and Zip readers could really
benefit from seeking when the input supports it.
I insist that we maintain the ability to read most ISO and Zip
files even when seek is unavailable.
For Zip files, that may involve having two completely separate Zip readers:
one that works in a streaming mode, and
one that works in a seeking fashion.
These two readers will certainly share a lot of code even though
the overal structure will be quite different.

= Seek in archives =

A few people have asked for the ability to efficiently
"re-read" particular archive entries.
This is a tricky subject.
For many formats, the performance gains from this would be very modest.
For example, after the item above is implemented, re-reading
a Zip archive from the beginning will be very fast since
it would only involve re-parsing the central directory.
The cases where there would be real gains (e.g., tar.gz)
are going to be very difficult to handle.
The most likely implementation would be some form of checkpointing
so that clients can explicitly ask for a checkpoint object and then
restore back to that checkpoint.
The checkpoint object could be complex if you have a series of
stacked read filters plus state in the format handler itself.

= fadvise() and O_DIRECT =

Libarchive's streaming operation should allow the kernel to
optimize I/O very cleanly.
However, the current bsdtar and bsdcpio clients don't
make any attempt to inform the kernel about that
pattern:  suitable fadvise() calls could have a significant
improvement in overall performance.

The O_DIRECT flag could also be used to provide better
I/O performance.  There has been some work recently
to align the copy buffers used within bsdtar so that
O_DIRECT can be used; there is probably more that
could be done.

= File I/O strategy development =

The `archive_read_open_filename` module now has a basic
notion of "strategy" for reading files from different sources.
This has been used to optimize reading archives from disk,
but could be further extended to optimize reading archives
from tapes, pipes, or other sources as well.

It would be even better to share the strategy layer
between `archive_read_open_filename` and
`archive_read_open_fd`.
The easiest approach is probably to convert
`archive_read_open_filename` into
a simple wrapper around `archive_read_open_fd`,
but there are a couple of small mismatches in the current
code that would need to be resolved.

= MMap and async I/O performance experiments =

It should be possible to read archives using mmap()
or async I/O and it might be significantly faster than
the current approach.
However, this requires some careful performance testing
before we can be confident that it really is an improvement.
(If it doesn't help performance, we shouldn't do it.)

Using mmap() should provide real advantages when reading
archives from disk, especially uncompressed archives.
This essentially lets libarchive work with very large blocks
by pushing the I/O concerns back onto the kernel.

Async I/O would seem to improve performance
with streaming tape drives.
Joerg Schilling has had good results with _star_ using two processes
and a shared-memory buffer to smooth out data flow when talking to tape drives.
I think async I/O could provide comparable performance
without forking. (Clients can easily get confused when
callbacks get invoked in different processes, so I'm reluctant
to fork within libarchive.
However, forking or threading would be okay if it were contained
entirely within a module such as `archive_read_open_filename`.
Reading in a background thread into a shared-memory buffer
while libarchive processes the previous buffer is certainly worth
investigating.)

Note:  In Jan 2010, I did some experiments using async I/O
to begin reading the next block of the archive while the
just-read block was being processed.  I found no performance
benefit from this.  My experiments included reading from
tape, reading from the same disk as the files were being
extracted to, and reading from a separate disk.

I've not yet experimented to see if I can find any
benefits from async I/O when writing archives to tape.

= BSD-style long filename support for GNU ld and other ld implementations =

The GNU/SysV ar format is ugly to write because you need to collect a filename table in advance.
This complicates programs that write ar format.
The BSD ar format avoids this problem but GNU ld doesn't support it.
If GNU ld could read the BSD ar format, then it would be easier
to create library-management tools on top of libarchive.

= Single-pass ar writer =

Another option is for libarchive's ar writer to simply
store the entire archive in memory (.a files are rarely
more than a few megabytes, so this is entirely feasible)
while collecting information for the filename table.
That would simplify use of libarchive's ar writer
module considerably.