#summary Overview of libarchive's zero-copy architecture.

= Introduction =

Libarchive is designed to minimize the copying of data internally
while still providing simple interfaces.
This provides both a great deal of flexibility in how input
data is presented while offering very high performance.

= Block-oriented input =

Libarchive reads from an archive by invoking a block input
function.
You can provide your own such function or use any of several
that are included with the library.

Each time your function is called, it provides libarchive with
a pointer to the block data and the size of the block.
Note that libarchive's core is completely agnostic about the size of
these blocks; you are free to return any amount of data from
a single byte to the full archive.
This flexibility allows libarchive to gracefully handle
situations where block sizes might vary (such as when reading
from bursty network connections) or where the complete archive
is already available in memory.

= Lazy reblocking =

Libarchive will always fully consume the block you provide before
asking for another block.
This removes any need for your input function to keep track
of multiple blocks.

Of course, libarchive does sometimes need to access a piece of
data---such as a filename or header---that might cross a block
boundary.
In these cases, libarchive will internally allocate buffer
space and copy data from multiple blocks as necessary.
Fortunately, this is very rarely necessary unless you are
providing very small blocks.

= Decompression and other input filters =

If the data is compressed or encoded, libarchive will feed the
data through a series of decoding filters.
These decoding filters typically work by copying the data
into a new buffer.
For decompression filters, the output buffer used by the
filter is often much larger than the input blocks, which
helps to make the subsequent processing even more efficient.

= File data =

The primary function for obtaining data from an entry body
is `archive_read_data_block()` which provides
a pointer and size to a contiguous region of file data.
If you are reading from an archive with uncompressed entries,
then this function will provide pointers directly into
the block data that was provided by the input function.

As you can see, this means that the data read into memory
by your input function can then be written back out from
the exact same buffers.

In order to best exploit this design, it is important that
your input function provide sufficiently large blocks, since
the rest of the processing will be limited by the size of
the initial block.
If your block size is somehow limited, it can make sense
to perform multiple reads each time your input function
is called and provide the total result to libarchive as a
single block.